Kubeadm/dual stack support in 1.21 (#26675)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/dual-stack-support.md

---

> title: Dual-stack support with kubeadm

Reviewer: The improvement is dual stack support, but once that lands it's just “dual stack” (think about the page about RBAC; once it was new, but the page about it doesn't talk about RBAC support, just about RBAC).

How about:
```suggestion
title: Enable dual-stack networking using kubeadm
```
?

Author: @neolit123 Do you agree to change the title?

`Dual-stack support with kubeadm` is simple.
I prefer `Enable dual-stack networking using kubeadm` as Tim says. The page mainly tells about how to enable it.

Reviewer 2: i don't object.

feature:

>   title: Dual-stack support with kubeadm

Reviewer: Let's hold off on advertising that as a feature until it's GA (or at least until we can guarantee in which release it will graduate to stable).

content_type: task
weight: 110

> ---

Reviewer: I'd also add:
```suggestion
min-kubernetes-server-version: 1.21
---
```

<!-- overview -->

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.21" state="beta" >}}

> IPv4/IPv6 dual-stack enables the allocation of both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses to {{< glossary_tooltip text="Pods" term_id="pod" >}} and {{< glossary_tooltip text="Services" term_id="service" >}}.

Reviewer: How about
```suggestion
Your Kubernetes cluster can run in [dual-stack](/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack/) networking mode, which means that cluster networking lets you use either address family. In a dual-stack cluster, the control plane can assign both an IPv4 address and an IPv6 address to a single {{< glossary_tooltip text="Pod" term_id="pod" >}} or a {{< glossary_tooltip text="Service" term_id="service" >}}.
```

<!-- body -->

> ## Enable dual-stack via kubeadm
> 
> Install kubeadm following the steps from the [Installing Kubeadm](/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/install-kubeadm/) documentation.
> 
> Make sure that nodes allow IPv6 forwarding, if not, run `sudo sysctl -w net.ipv6.conf.all.forwarding=1` on every node in the cluster.

Reviewer: I'd change both the formatting and the advice:
```suggestion
## {{% heading "prerequisites" %}}

You need to have installed the {{< glossary_tooltip text="kubeadm" term_id="kubeadm" >}} tool, following the steps from [Installing kubeadm](/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/install-kubeadm/).

For each server that you want to use as a {{< glossary_tooltip text="node" term_id="node" >}}, make sure it allows IPv6 forwarding. On Linux, you can set this by running run `sysctl -w net.ipv6.conf.all.forwarding=1` as the root user on each server.

You need to have an IPv4 and and IPv6 address range to use. Cluster operators typically
use private address ranges for IPv4. For IPv6, a cluster operator typically chooses a global
unicast address block from within `2000::/3`, using a range that is assigned to the operator.  
You don't have to route the cluster's IP address ranges to the public internet.

The size of the IP address allocations should be suitable for the number of Pods and
Services that you are planning to run.
```

Notice that I'm suggesting using global unicast IPv6 ranges. That matches what I see as common practice
for IPv6 adoption generally.

{{< note >}}

> `kubeadm upgrade` will change `IPv6DualStack` to true by default if the feature gate is not set in an old cluster. However, cluster CIDR and service CIDR modifications are not supported.

Reviewer: I suggest:
```suggestion
If you are upgrading an existing cluster then, by default, the `kubeadm upgrade` command
changes the [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)
`IPv6DualStack` to `true` if that is not already enabled.  
However, `kubeadm` does not support making modifications to the pod IP address range
(“cluster CIDR”) nor to the cluster's Service address range (“Service CIDR”).
```

{{< /note >}}

### Create a dual-stack cluster

> To create a dual-stack cluster with `kubeadm init` you can pass the following flags:

Reviewer: I suggest
```suggestion
To create a dual-stack cluster with `kubeadm init` you can pass command line arguments
similar to the following example:
```
```

```shell

> kubeadm init --pod-network-cidr=10.244.0.0/16,fd00:10:244::/56 --service-cidr=10.96.0.0/16,fd00:10:96::/112

Reviewer: I'd use a documentation address range for IPv6. The range `fd00::/8` is deprecated.

```suggestion
# These address ranges are examples
kubeadm init --pod-network-cidr=10.244.0.0/16,2001:db8:42:0::/56 --service-cidr=10.96.0.0/16,2001:db8:42:1::/112
```

```

To make things clearer, here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yaml` for the primary dual-stack control plane node.

```yaml

> apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2

Reviewer: As there are multiple documents in this YAML stream, I'd write:
```suggestion
---
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
```

kind: ClusterConfiguration
featureGates:
  IPv6DualStack: true
networking:

>   podSubnet: 10.244.0.0/16,fd00:10:244::/56
>   serviceSubnet: 10.96.0.0/16,fd00:10:96::/112

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  podSubnet: 10.244.0.0/16,2001:db8:42:0::/56     # example ranges
  serviceSubnet: 10.96.0.0/16,2001:db8:42:1::/112 # example ranges
```

Reviewer 3: hehe, that is my fault, those are the default kind valudes, Tim is always spot on these things, docs recommended ranges are 2001:db8

---
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: InitConfiguration
localAPIEndpoint:
  advertiseAddress: "10.100.0.1"
  bindPort: 6443
nodeRegistration:
  kubeletExtraArgs:
    fail-swap-on: "false"
    node-ip: 10.100.0.2,fd00:1:2:3::2
```

> `advertiseAddress` in InitConfiguration specifies the IP address the API Server will advertise it's listening on. It equals to the `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag of `kubeadm init`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`advertiseAddress` in InitConfiguration specifies the IP address that the API Server will advertise it is listening on. The value of `advertiseAddress` equals the `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag of `kubeadm init`
```

> Run kubeadm to initiate the dual-stack control plane node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run kubeadm to initiate the dual-stack control plane node:
```

```shell
kubeadm init --config=kubeadm-config.yaml
```

Currently, the kube-controller-manager flags `--node-cidr-mask-size-ipv4|--node-cidr-mask-size-ipv6` are being left with default values. See [enable IPv4/IPv6 dual stack](/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack#enable-ipv4ipv6-dual-stack).

{{< note >}}

> Currently the `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag does not support dual-stack.

Reviewer: We usually don't write “currently” etc unless revising the behavior is a firm commitment.
```suggestion
The `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag does not support dual-stack.
```

{{< /note >}}

### Join a node to dual-stack cluster

Before joining a node, make sure that the node has IPv6 routable network interface and allows IPv6 forwarding.

Here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yaml` for joining a worker node to the cluster.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: JoinConfiguration
discovery:
  bootstrapToken:
    apiServerEndpoint: 10.100.0.1:6443
    token: 0c0z4p.dnafh6vnmouus569
    caCertHashes: ["sha256:fcb3e956a6880c05fc9d09714424b827f57a6fdc8afc44497180905946527adf"]
nodeRegistration:
  kubeletExtraArgs:

>     fail-swap-on: "false"

Reviewer: Why set `fail-swap-on`?

Reviewer 2: yep, this can be omitted.
we can also keep the config minimal without non-relevant values like the kubelet extra args and CA-hash / tokens.

Author: removed.

    node-ip: 10.100.0.3,fd00:1:2:3::3
```

Also, here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yaml` for joining another control plane node to the cluster.
```yaml
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: JoinConfiguration
controlPlane:
  localAPIEndpoint:
    advertiseAddress: "10.100.0.2"
    bindPort: 6443
discovery:
  bootstrapToken:
    apiServerEndpoint: 10.100.0.1:6443
    token: 0c0z4p.dnafh6vnmouus569
    caCertHashes: ["sha256:fcb3e956a6880c05fc9d09714424b827f57a6fdc8afc44497180905946527adf"]
nodeRegistration:
  kubeletExtraArgs:
    fail-swap-on: "false"
    node-ip: 10.100.0.4,fd00:1:2:3::4

```

> `advertiseAddress` in JoinConfiguration.controlPlane specifies the IP address the API Server will advertise it's listening on. It equals to the `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag of `kubeadm join`.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
`advertiseAddress` in JoinConfiguration.controlPlane specifies the IP address that the API Server will advertise it is listening on. The value of `advertiseAddress` equals the `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag of `kubeadm join`.
```

```shell
kubeadm join --config=kubeadm-config.yaml ...
```

### Create a single-stack cluster

{{< note >}}

> Enabling the dual-stack feature doesn't mean that you need to use dual-stack addresses, i.e., you can have a single-stack cluster with the feature flag enabled.

Reviewer: How about:
```suggestion
Enabling the dual-stack feature doesn't mean that you need to use dual-stack addressing.  
You can deploy a single-stack cluster that has the dual-stack networking feature enabled.
```

{{< /note >}}

In 1.21 the `IPv6DualStack` feature is Beta and the feature gate is defaulted to `true`. To disable the feature you must configure the feature gate to `false`. Note that once the feature is GA, the feature gate will be removed.

```shell
kubeadm init --feature-gates IPv6DualStack=false
```

To make things more clear, here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yaml` for the single-stack control plane node.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: ClusterConfiguration
featureGates:
  IPv6DualStack: false
networking:
  podSubnet: 10.244.0.0/16
  serviceSubnet: 10.96.0.0/16
```

## {{% heading "whatsnext" %}}

* [Validate IPv4/IPv6 dual-stack](/docs/tasks/network/validate-dual-stack) networking

> * [Dual-stack enabled](/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack/) cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Read about [Dual-stack](/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack/) cluster networking
```
